Not boring enough
All latest updates
Another U-turn on electricity will not solve Britain’s power crunch

The government's "course correction" on energy policy has wavered from greenery, to stability, to unpredictability
Nov 18th 2015 | Britain
Timekeeper 

THE agonisingly slow death of the Ferrybridge coal-fired power station in Yorkshire, due to be shut early next year on its 50th anniversary, was the subject of a BBC documentary on November 17th. Coincidentally, a day later Amber Rudd, the energy secretary, announced a “course correction” on energy policy, including a proposal to close down all Britain’s other coal-fired power plants by 2025. When electricity generation features in TV schedules as well as headlines, it is clear something unusual is afoot. “Fundamentally I want energy policy to be boring,” Ms Rudd says. The trouble is, under the Tory government it is not boring enough.

Like many countries, Britain is struggling to cope with the integration of green but intermittent renewables in its energy mix. They still make up less than one-fifth of the country’s power-generation capacity, but that is enough to drag down wholesale electricity prices when the wind is blowing, because at such times wind turbines generate virtually free electricity. Other sources of power, such as natural gas and coal, struggle to compete. As older or dirtier plants are shut down, the risk of blackouts increases. This month power outages loomed when National Grid, a utility, forced industry to curb electricity consumption one afternoon after an unexpected string of plant breakdowns.

The trick for policymakers is to ensure that electricity is secure, affordable and environmentally sustainable. In that context, Ms Rudd said she wanted new gas-fired plants built over the next ten years to replace the back-up power provided by dirtier coal. But she did not say how she would entice investors to build the new plants, nor how many she had in mind. She said she would review a “capacity market” that offers subsidies to companies to provide reserve power during peak demand, but offered no specifics on how this would be reformed. And she called for more interconnection lines with Europe. That might further reduce wholesale electricity prices.

Antonio Volpin of McKinsey, a consultancy, sees mixed signals in the so-called reset. He notes that Ms Rudd is clearer about the policies towards sources of energy that she doesn’t support than those she does. Closing coal mines and cutting subsidies on wind and solar, as she has announced, will not help her prevent a power crunch unless she can assure investors that government support for gas will be unwavering, Mr Volpin says: “If you want to invest in gas capacity in the UK there is no long-term security about your revenues.” A related problem is unpredictability. Ms Rudd says offshore wind farms should get “no more blank cheques”. But the government has promised a vast subsidy to builders of the proposed Hinkley Point nuclear-power plant in Somerset.

Analysts say the Tories’ emphasis has shifted from greenery during the coalition with the Liberal Democrats in 2010-15 to security since their landslide election victory in May. Though the renewables subsidies were costly, the U-turn wrongfooted those who had bet heavily on green energy. Neil Auerbach, chief executive of Hudson Clean Energy, an American firm that has investments in onshore wind and distribution in Britain, says investors have myriad potential electricity projects around the world in which to put their money, and are easily put off by “peripatetic” policy.

Energy ministers, he says, should behave like central bankers. “You have to be very focused on stability...with an understanding of the reverberations of what you say.” So far Ms Rudd has failed the boring test. Then again, as Britain’s fourth energy secretary in seven years, she inherits a legacy of unpredictability.