Question on Quora:
Why didn't the United States 'finish' Russia when it had the chance (during the fall of the USSR)? How did they let someone like Putin come to power?

Robert Maxwell
Answered Aug 25
This question misunderstands the thinking of American policy makers on a fundamental level.

American foreign policy at the upper levels can be abstracted into a couple of different strains of thought, generally named after the presidents that inaugurated them or were strongest proponents of that schema. The “classic” four types are Hamiltonian, Wilsonian, Jeffersonian, and Jacksonian.

It should be noted that few presidents or policy makers are ever overtly one of these archetypes: instead, they’re continually recurring themes and outlooks influenced and informed by varying strands of American political thought and ideology. Nor should it be taken to understand that a single president or policy is singly Hamiltonian or Jeffersonian or whatever—these strands can and do interact and are often in some degree of conflict.

Before I get more into this, I’ll give a short (short) primer on the four of these, and then work into American policy after the fall of the Soviet Union and just why a question of “finishing” Russia would have been alien to American policymakers.

Hamiltonian: Big business and Government are friends and American government policy should work expressly for the economic interests of the United States. American foreign policy extends only so far as to secure trade, and that on a pragmatic, not an ideological level. War and foreign involvement ought, similarly, to be pursued only so far as it directly benefits American economic development. The Hamiltonian set shared a great deal in common with British Whigs, from whence they arguably came and whose outlook Hamilton himself generally shared.

Jacksonian: Foreign policy fundamentally exists to ensure the security and economic prosperity of the American people, as opposed to big business. Economically, American policy ought to preserve the wealth of the average joe—say, though protectionism. Militarily, the governments of other countries are none of our business so long as they pose no threat: why spill American blood to oust some tinpot dictator?

Trump and the movement surrounding him is almost pitch-perfect Jacksonian, at least in terms of rhetoric: build a wall to keep Americans safe; refuse refugees to keep Americans safe; fight ISIS to keep Americans safe, but otherwise turn away from things like NATO which don’t directly serve to keep Americans safe, etc.

Jeffersonian: American institutions are special and exceptional, and American democracy must be protected from outside influence. Essentially inward-looking and small-government, Jeffersonians want an extremely limited foreign policy aimed largely at defending American democracy at home, alongside a very limited, decentralized government.

Wilsonian: I’ve saved this one for last, because it has a lot of bearing on what we’ll be talking about in a bit. Essentially, just like the Jacksonians are the opposite of the Hamiltonians, the Wilsonians are the opposite of the Jeffersonians: American institutions are special and exceptional, and the only means to a peaceful and just world is to spread American democracy to other countries. They stress international rule of law, free trade, capitalism, etc., not on any real pragmatic grounds but because, in their opinion, once the world embraces those tenets, we’ll have a better world. It’s almost a missionary outlook on American democracy and capitalism.

Fundamentally, the major foreign policy substrate at work in the postwar United States has been Wilsonianism. We’ve had a few flirtations with the other schools during the Cold War and afterward—Trump, as I said, is largely Jacksonian, and American policy has had a strong side dose of Hamiltonianism, but generally Wilsonianism has been dominant.

Postwar institutions have largely been built on the assumptions of Wilsonianism—the United Nations is an example. Economic institutions like the IMF and the World Bank contributed to the embedded liberalism of the postwar world only partially on a Hamiltonian level, but much more comprehensively on a Wilsonian one. The post-war Bretton Woods system of embedded liberalism was partially of a pragmatic Hamiltonian cast, but more fully was of an idealist bent, that a liberal post-war economic system was not just good for America, but good for the world. The Washington Consensus doubled down on that.

The United States’s actions in the Cold War were also broadly of a Wilsonian type, focused on anti-communism. In this perspective, to be a communist was to be more of a threat than a simple dictator. Hence, deals could be made with dictators, especially ones that embraced free market economics like, say, Pinochet. Absolutists that embraced liberalizing economic and social policies, such as the Shah under the White Revolution, were embraced even as, politically, their oppressive rule was discomfiting.

When the Soviet Union fell, that Wilsonianism was still strong. Our reaction to it was based and predicated on that schema, and it shows. The fall of the Soviet Union and the rise of the Russian Federation was greeted warmly: not only did an “enemy” fall, but that enemy had converted, more or less, to a democratic system not altogether different than the United States. The United States and the Russian Federation declared a mutual, strategic partnership. George H. W. Bush began talking about a “new world order.” The United States shipped over economic experts to help Russia with economic liberalization of the sort that happened in the ex-Warsaw Pact states—what would become the infamous “shock therapy,” that would lead to the near-collapse of the Russian economy. American political consultants would even go on to help Yeltsin with his re-election win.

As far as the Wilsonians were concerned, America’s job was done: Russia was democratizing and liberalizing, and was embracing something like free trade (or at least freer trade). All of that meant that Russia was not something that had to be “finished off,” or even an enemy at all—the extension of democracy and liberalism into Russia would, ideally, transform it into something like an ally and friend of the United States, and would make Russia a cornerstone for peace in the new, post-Cold War world. To have advocated for “finishing Russia off,” would have been insane.

Of course, we know the story didn’t quite work out that way. Instead of liberalizing into a strong economy, the Russian economy nearly collapsed under the weight of shock therapy. Democracy didn’t translate, for Russians, into an automatically better life. A lot of this was the mistake of the United States. Subsequent events turned a Russia that might have been America’s friend for a thousand years into a Russia that remains in a coyly unspoken, but universally understood, opposition to the United States in the international sphere, with Russia herself still a source and major curator of the global anti-American narrative through her media outlets.

Contrary to popular belief, the United States neither engineered nor intended for Russia’s economy to collapse, nor for her to enter a period of general political stasis—those were unhappy side-effects of, on one hand, the United States’s over-enthusiastic support of too-rapid liberalization and democratization and, on the other, the chaos belonging intrinsically to a revolution mixed with domestic Russian mistakes, including liberalization-fueled corruption and mismanagement. There were mistakes all around, and Hanlon’s razor is a good guideline here, as it is in most things.

But the point is that, at the time, the Wilsonians thought Russia was on the way to fully joining the democratized, liberal-economic order, and that this would be the cornerstone triumph of American ways. That was the victory, and any attempt to “finish Russia off,” would have made no sense in this schema.

And none of this is to mention that, after the fall of the Soviet Union, American foreign policy was generally too busy trying to reformulate the security institutions designed to defend against the ex-USSR—such as NATO—and figure out what the “new world order,” would look like, and what America’s place in it would be, to take much aim at the new Russia, even if they wanted to.
