13 Moonbean November 13th, 2013 at 8:39 PM
The characters…

I don't find Kim Tan's character dull or boring at all. He's mother to his childlike mother (after the fight his mother asks whether the kid he had a fight with him is richer than them and Tan says is that the first question you should ask, he tells his mother to cut down the wine), can stand up to his father (those 3 years alone in California definitely matured him beyond his years). Tan's honesty is his best quality. I don't feel sorry for Ra Hel at all because he never misleads or deceives her. The only thing he apparently did regarding her is to not resist the engagement but he told her he had no intention of marrying her, doesn't hide anything about Eun Sang from her (or vice versa). He's blunt enough to tell his dad he doesn't like him (boy, was that a surprise), admits frankly his bullying past to Eun Sang, honestly shows his tender feelings to a brother who treats him like dirt. To me Kim Tan is a very interesting an unusual character.

I'm amazed to see comments stating that Tan is no different than Young Do or is actually worse. Whatever Tan might have done in the past he has stopped. We have never seen him enjoying the battle with Young Do either. He tried to ignore it, avoid it, prevent it but Young Do just wouldn't let go. Tan was criticized for not interfering with Young Do's bullying (Tan's passiveness against bullying in the beginning is only to be expected. He used to be a bully himself. It would not be realistic that he would react the first time. It was obvious what's happening was bothering him but he didn't want a confrontation with Young Do. It is equally obvious that he misses the friend he lost as much as the brother. The Tan that came back is already much different than the one how left.) But after he is forced into the conflict he is still being criticized. I'm not a LMH fan and I think Tan is less than perfect (which is perfectly normal considering he's only 18 and has been alone since 15 with no one to love or guide him and we heard that he wasn't loved or guided by his father before that either). However, I feel it is unfair to criticize him for engaging in a battle with Young Do that he neither started nor wanted in the first place in the only way he can think of. Young Do on the other hand enjoyed abusing his victims until Eun Sang. And he only stopped because he got what he wanted, his victim ran away. I just don't see how Tan and Young Do are the same or Tan is worse. Even in their treatment of Eun Sang they have been equated but that's wrong. Tan's love might be possessive, impatient, selfish and suffocating at times (like many 18 year old's love can be) but all he wants in the end is to be with her. Young Do on the other hand is using the girl he likes to get back at Tan. Tan's feelings are pure, Young Do's are twisted. When Tan hugged Eun Sang he did it to console her, to be close to her, because he likes her and also thinking/hoping he likes her. When Young Do hugged Eun Sang he did it to annoy Tan knowing full well Eun Sang doesn't like him, thinking she hates him. Tan wants to love and protect Eun Sang, Young Do is using her.

Why would Eun Sang like Tan? I have seen this question posed several times. What does it take for an 18 year old to like another? He is good looking and he likes her. But besides that first of all she also felt an affinity with him as he felt one with her back in California. They witnessed each other's vulnerabilities and their love for their selfish siblings is their initial common ground. But also Tan helped her a lot in California. He tried to please her (offering to take her to the Hollywood sign or to eat pancakes). As rich as he was he did not look down on her once. Why wouldn't she like him?

Young Do vs. Tan for Eun Sang? Absolutely no contest! Young Do has been so unpleasant to her I don't see why in the world Eun Sang would be conflicted as to which guy to like even if she hadn't met Tan first (In addition to giving us a bad boy second lead and a much gentler hero another thing that distinguishes this story from cliches and BOF is that the female lead doesn't fall for the second lead first. She did start to truly fall for Tan even though due to the circumstances she tried not to show it.) Eun Sang called Young Do weird and weird is right. Setting all his awful bullying right in front of her aside, Young Do is a classist snob while Tan isn't. The 18 year old Tan is a gentle soul but Young Do is cruel. Tan has seen the error of his ways but Young Do hasn't yet. I think there is absolutely no comparison. And although we have seen Young Do's vulnerable moments Eun Sang hasn't until yesterday. His unveiled threats about revealing Tan's secret doesn't endear him either. I'm glad Tan isn't intimidated by this. I feel so sorry for him what with his beloved brother and ex best-friend keep telling he is a bastard to his face. Whether he looks like a high schooler or not Kim Tan invokes all sorts of maternal feelings in me. I just want to give him a big hug on behalf of his brother, his betraying best friend, the girl he fell for, the father who never hugged him, the mother who doesn't know how to love his son. I started to feel more sorry for Young Do yesterday and so did Eun Sang but all he will get from this can be a friendship.

Tan is also criticized for the way he treats his fiance Ra Hel. Granted, he doesn't treat her as one treats a fiance but the fact of the matter is he does not see this as a real engagement, nor does he see her as his fiance. What he said on his first entry to school was mocking her efforts to make more out of it. Tan is brutally honest with everyone, including himself. He did not have the typical denial phase that your typical chaebol heir does falling for a regular girl (that's another cliche the show did not follow. Neither Tan nor Young Do denied their feelings), he did not deceive himself, he told her he liked her as soon as he realized. He was equally honest with Ra Hel. He never pretended he liked or wanted her, he bluntly told her he does not intend to marry her. He also told her he did not get engaged to her through his free will. When asked by Ra Hel whether he had anything to do with Eun Sang's transfer to their school he replied “since when what I want makes a difference in my family?” Accepting the truth in that Ra Hel wanted to move to another topic, of their engagement, Tan replied this time “we were talking about us”. How much more openly can you tell someone you did not get engaged to them willingly? It is too much to expect an 18 year old to go against his family and break that engagement as soon as he likes Eun Sang when he doesn't yet have the education to support himself and criticize him for wanting to live and date freely like any other 18 year old would want. I don't know how the writer is going to extricate her hero from the tight spot she stuck him into but it is no easy feat. I hope this will not be the major angst of this drama, I didn't want any romantic relationship between Kim Tan and Eun Sang before this engagement business is concluded but I'm not willing to wait 10 more episodes for that. This being a high school drama rather than waiting for a wedding as a happy ending I'd like to see them dating for real for a few episodes at least.

I was also very surprised to read comments stating that Eun Sang deserved to be slapped for poaching another woman's man. For one, violence is not a solution. But more importantly, even though cheating is done by two people and both are in the wrong the person who is responsible to Ra Hel is not Eun Sang but Tan. In such cases the cheated party always goes for the easier target, the third party but that2s not right.

Anyway, while I was thinking on this engagement I noticed the parallels with the one in Secret Love. Min Hyuk is also engaged with the request of his father for business. His fiance is similarly someone he knows from his childhood and used to call a friend. He is also attracted to another woman and doesn't seem to hide it from his fiance. The marked difference is Min Hyuk was intending to marry Se Yeon albeit as a business arrangement, told her they can live their separate lives. He even offered to give her a divorce when his dad is gone. His fiance Se Yeon wanting more than he is willing to give disagrees. Another difference is that Min Hyuk is an adult, if he can sacrifice his dad's wealth he can put an end to the engagement but in the beginning he was too weak to do it. Part of his growing as a character was about him finding the will and courage to put an end to that engagement, cost him what it might. But before going through a similar growing up and also having a way to economically supporting himself it is too much to expect the same from Kim Tan. When there wasn't a girl he liked in his life he took the path of least resistance and did not object to this engagement – I'm not using the word “agreed” on purpose because I don't think his agreement was sought. He just went along with it without objections. But now that he has a reason that makes it inconvenient for him to have a fiance we will see what he's made of.

I have also remembered City Hall, my favourite KES drama [spoiler ahead]. One sore (sour?) point there was the hero being engaged and having an affair with the heroine on the side. So unfortunate as it is, KES likes her heroes like that.

I don't feel much pity for Ra Hel. She is a very unpleasant person. She's rude (remember how she acted towards Eun Sang in LA when she found her in Tan's house), a snob that values money above all else (she was rude to Chan Young as well saying he was not her class so she wouldn't condescend to talk to him), doesn't care for other people's feelings (setting all the nasty things she said to Eun Sang aside remember the way she introduced Tan and Chan Young to each other: Bo Na's ex and current boyfriend). The fact that she finds Young Do's bullying distasteful is the only positive thing I can see about her. In her way she is as bad as Young Do and doesn't inspire any sympathy in me. She has even less reason/justification for her behaviour than Young Do. Young Do is motherless and has obvious issues related to that, what is worse, his father is a monster. Ra Hel is just plain spoilt, arrogant snob. When it comes to the issue of Kim Tan and the engagement to me she is the prime example of a woman with no pride who is trying to stick to a guy who does not want her knowing full well that she is unwanted. I cannot abide woman with no pride. If I was in her situation no matter what I may feel for Kim Tan I would just end that engagement. So frankly, I believe she is partially responsible for the way she is treated. What is worse is her mom is aware of Tan's indifference to her but is still using her daughter for business rather than looking out for her happiness. I think it's too harsh to lay all the responsibility at Tan's door in this instance.

Reply