[Interview Part I] Shin Se Kyung Says She Couldn′t Let Go of Seo Mi Do of ′When a Man Loves′
interesting  
Facebook

weibo
renren
share more
1
Rating
Rating more
Two Stars
2013.06.29 16:00  CJ E&M enewsWorld Ko Hong Ju  Translation Credit : Erika Kim
As the interview itself took place so soon after the conclusion of her drama, I expected to find Shin Se Kyung in low spirits. After the interview, however, I found she was the one who had pumped me up instead with her bright expressions.

So I found that the actress Shin Se Kyung had matured yet again.

MBC′s When a Man Loves sparked many controversies before its conclusion. Most of it surrounded the character of Seo Mi Do. The way she continuously weighed Han Tae Sang (Song Seung Hun) and Lee Jae Hee (Yeon Woo Jin) failed to receive sympathy from her viewers, and merely made her a two-timer.

All staff and screenwriters aside, Shin Se Kyung would probably have been the one most affected by the controversies, as she was the face of Seo Mi Do. Still, she didn′t listen to the criticisms surrounding her character, and plowed forth as Seo Mi Do until the end.

That was the best she could do as an actress, and that′s why she was satisfied with what she had done.

[Interview Part I] Shin Se Kyung Says She Couldn′t Let Go of Seo Mi Do of ′When a Man Loves′

Shin Se Kyung said Seo Mi Do was like a porcupine. It is true that she hurts you when you try to embrace her in your arms, but she has something about her that just can′t be ignored.

It seemed that was why Shin Se Kyung couldn′t believe the piece was over. Mi Do is the type that just can′t be forgotten.

What, then, did Shin Se Kyung herself think about When a Man Loves, and what kind of woman did she think Seo Mi Do was?

Enews met with the actress to find out.

You must′ve felt a bit sad to see the conclusion of your drama. How have you been doing?

I can′t think of anything special I did except attend interviews. I think I′ll spend my days doing what I always did every day. Listen to music, read books, see movies and do the things I didn′t get to do while shooting. I like to cook, too. I digress, but I think I recover pretty quickly physically.

How do you feel about your piece being over?

Actors don′t just suddenly break off from their pieces. I felt so for my previous piece, and I still can′t believe that this drama is over. I′ve been feeling it little by little with these interviews.

This passionate romance probably wasn′t easy for you to act in.

It was a pretty interesting piece of work. I′m very attached to the character Mi Do.

A lot of people debated over Seo Mi Do′s actions. What do you think about the two-timer controversy?

I couldn′t understand her in some parts as a fellow woman, but I had to express her thoughts and embrace her; I couldn′t just say "What is this" and leave it at that. I tried my best to understand Mi Do. I just tried not to make her go all over the place, and helped her fit in the flow of the story.

You said Mi Do is like a porcupine.

That′s right. Mi Do is like a porcupine. You feel something sting you when you try to embrace her. I became attached to Mi Do as much as I didn′t like her during the piece, and that′s why I feel more affection toward her.

You must have suffered from the debates.

To be honest, I did become nervous at one point. Still, I recovered, and from then on nothing could hurt me. I became stronger and bolder. The people around me were more worried. Actually, I don′t visit portal sites while I′m working on a drama, so I was okay, but the director was especially worried about me. I am an actress, and I know I′m supposed to be acting, so I′m not shaken by such criticisms.

[Interview Part I] Shin Se Kyung Says She Couldn′t Let Go of Seo Mi Do of ′When a Man Loves′

Are you satisfied with the ending?

I don′t know. When I put myself in Mi Do′s shoes, I realize that there′s no perfect answer between Tae Sang and Jae Hee. I don′t believe that there was an ending that all viewers would′ve been satisfied with.

Are you happy with the viewership ratings? It did end at no. 1 but the latter parts sort of lost traction.

I can′t do anything about viewership ratings. What matters is that I did my best with no regrets.

What do you think about the drama ′When a Man Loves′?

I think the attractions of this drama is that you can see it from many different viewpoints. Its characters tell a story on a dimension completely different from those for other simple stories. You have to go over each character to really understand it, and that′s why evaluasions can differ based on different thoughts and values. People who really want to understand the piece go over it again to evaluate it, and I think that′s the strength of this drama.

What have you gained and what have you lost through this piece?

I haven′t lost anything. I′ve gained a lot. I′m happy that I found the answer to a question I′ve had about acting. I just got two or three answers to 3,000 questions I had, but still, I feel I′ve matured inside as an actress.

What role do you want to take on in the future? What can we expect from you next?

I want to be in a piece that can make people laugh, one that fans can enjoy with a lighter heart.

Photo credit: Kim Byung Kwan

Tag
Shin Se Kyung  20130629 When a Man Loves (Drama)  20130629
[Interview Part II] Shin Se Kyung Talks about ′When a Man Loves′ as Its Actress
interesting  
Facebook

weibo
renren
share more
0
Rating
Rating more
Two Stars
2013.06.29 17:00  CJ E&M enewsWorld Ko Hong Ju  Translation Credit : Erika Kim
MBC′s When a Man Loves is an interesting piece in many ways. It sparked controversy with the actions of its characters, but still the actors acting in the roles were able to garner praise for their skills.

Among those being praised and criticized at the same time was Shin Se Kyung.

The actions of Seo Mi Do (Shin Se Kyung) had everyone talking. The way she weighed between Han Tae Sang (Song Seung Hun) and Lee Jae Hee (Yeon Woo Jin) led her to be criticized as a two-timer.

[Interview Part II] Shin Se Kyung Talks about ′When a Man Loves′ as Its Actress

Shin Se Kyung, however, plowed forth, and managed to bring the drama to a successful close.

So now that she′s not Seo Mi Do anymore, what does Shin Se Kyung think about relationships, love and men?

Enews met with Shin Se Kyung to hear her talk about her thoughts on love.

Shin Se Kyung is a woman who...

When asked whom she would choose, between Han Tae Sang and Lee Jae Hee, Shin Se Kyung answered with a laugh, "None are my type."

She said she wanted a man who she can understand and respect and who shows understanding and respect. It′s not that Han Tae Sang and Lee Jae Hee aren′t understanding or respectful; it′s just that she just wants to find a different man.

[Interview Part II] Shin Se Kyung Talks about ′When a Man Loves′ as Its Actress

"Because the three were so tangled up, I just wanted to find a new man," she confessed. "My friends actually think differently about the two men too. That′s what′s so interesting about this drama."

So what is her actual ideal type like?

"I like men who are professional in their work," she said. "It may seem too general, but that′s what I′ve been thinking for a long time. I like it when they show passion and professionality in whatever they do."

[Interview Part II] Shin Se Kyung Talks about ′When a Man Loves′ as Its Actress

Shin Se Kyung is an actress who...

It was pretty ironic how Seo Mi Do was always criticized for her actions but Shin Se Kyung, the one who gave Seo Mi Do her face, was praised so.

The criticisms would have hit her hard, but she never wavered, and in the end drew praise for her acting.

Though the changes came slowly, Shin Se Kyung was slowly becoming the ideal actress by taking it one step at a time. At times she may fall back, but she knows it′s better than standing still.

"Rather than be happy with where I am, I want to always mature and grow," she said.

Photo credit: Kim Byung Kwan