My sister Rachel and I, were always close. For nearly 2 
months out of the year we were the same age. I was born 
at the end of January, she end of November. Although I 
thought she was cute, even beautiful when she smiled, I 
never really saw her in a sexual way before. At least, 
not until I turned 17. (MF-teens, youths, inc, 1st, 
mast, oral, rom)

***

My sister, Rachel, and I, were always close. For nearly 
2 months out of the year we were the same age; I was 
born at the end of January, she end of November. Our 
father died a couple of months before Rachel was born, 
and as a result I always felt more protective of her. 
Mum was pretty independent and although I learnt from 
her later in life just how hard dad's death hit her, 
she always managed okay. 

When it was time for me to go to primary school, mum 
enrolled us both at the same time, halfway through the 
year - enough to give my sister a chance to keep up, 
and short enough that I didn't miss out on anything, I 
suppose. She wanted us to be together as close and as 
much as possible, and contrary to how I saw other kids 
my age act about their siblings, I didn't mind.

We shared the same bedroom and bath time until I turned 
about 9 and Rachel was 8. We both started puberty at 
the same time, and we suddenly began to notice the 
changes happening in both our bodies. We were never 
ashamed of each others nudity or our own, we were 
completely comfortable with each other. We would notice 
and compare notes while we bathed, but a few months 
after we began to come of age our mum got a promotion. 

This meant a transfer to another state, another school, 
another house. Because mum was earning more money, we 
now got separate rooms as opposed to the two single 
beds me and my sister had shared up until that point. 
The few weeks off work while we moved made mum a bit 
more aware about how her kids were growing, and though 
I'm sure it must have been uncomfortable for her, she 
sat us down, said "William, Rachel, we need to have a 
talk," and gave us one about the birds and the bees. 
Rachel and I started showering separately after that, 
and although it was a fairly major change and I missed 
our routine at first, we both quickly adapted.

In many ways we began to drift apart, but in many ways 
we remained as close as ever. I started noticing girls, 
and of course Rachel started to attract the guys. By 
the time we started high school, She was about half a 
head shorter than me at 5 and a half feet, and she kept 
her black hair cropped short, sweeping down and around 
to the front of her neck. Rachel was also devastatingly 
intelligent for her age, probably a result of starting 
school earlier than most people. 

